All right. So this presentation is
titled applications of monotic
programming. My name is Antonov. Today
is November 7th, 2025. This is a
presentation for the Wol from technology
conference 2025. I'm going to be
discussing um moni programming
introducing monaric programming and moni
pipelines. I'm going to use questions
and answers in order to make that easier
and I'm going to use variety of
examples. Uh before going further, I
would like to mention that I have these
two screens. Um and I'm going to be
switching this is the screen with the
presentation and I'm going to be
switching to to this screen here to show
some other stuff. So before kind of like
I would like to clarify a little bit but
um I'm a little bit beyond monaric
programming. I I program it. I use it a
lot. I'm not enamored by and um so it
kind of please take this into account
when I listen my exposition.
So monaric programming is a relatively
simple concept.
Some people introduce it and think and
introduce it as a very complicated
concept and I don't think it is the
case. It was invented long time ago
during the cold war. uh some people
think that it was um given to us by
aliens
and um I really hope that with this
question answer is kind of you know
informal introduction or formal uh it's
going to be somewhat somewhat easier to
digest what it is. So um this is a
little bit again about my attitude.
Yeah, we can monet you can don't monet.
Yeah, it's like you can live happily
without knowing about monots or you can
know know them but you know not
necessarily understand them. Again, you
can probably even be happier. Maybe your
life is not going to be that interesting
if you don't know about mon but yeah
that's another another story. So this
talk is an advertisement for a cycle of
lectures which I have started in um and
you can find them in YouTube. So there
it's a it's a serious most serious
endeavor. Each of these lectures around
40 45 minutes. So I'm going to start
with the the questions here. I'm going
to stop um after 10 minutes to see uh
any other questions in the in the chat
in the Q&A
panels. So who is this about right? So
which is the audience of this talk. So
these are people who want to be informed
to other software monitor also
experienced from language of America
users developer wannabes um and probably
other other software language uh
developers
who want to know how to do what are what
are monots how they look like in wra
language
also of course uh these are the LLM
supported programmers or code baristas.
So uh what is a good showcase for Monari
programming? So this is a scrolling
scrolling presentation and I'm going to
be going up and down depending on the on
the on the questions where you know what
I want to show. So let's do a showcase.
Uh because it's quite a long um a lot of
lot of questions and answers I have
gathered. I'm not going to to do that
much of a live presentation so to speak.
So this is the famous u titanic data
set. So here I create uh certain a
certain monaric pipeline right. So I'm
starting a monot software monot and this
software monot I'm splitting it into 80
80 and 20% for the training and testing
data showing some data summary. This
what you see here then training nearest
neighbors classifier showing accuracy
and precision and so forth. And also
when I say here I want to see the
receive operating characteristic plots.
This is what is happening here. These
are the plots. Now I can also take the
actual classifier. I can take it out of
the monot. And this is what it is. So I
can use it for some other computations.
What I'm actually showing it's something
like this. Right? So um we do this very
often in mathematics like say for
reanalysis you transfer your problem
into some certain other domain in some
other space you navigate the
computations in that space and then you
transfer you know then you map it back
right and so something like that is
happening here I'm taking the data set
I'm putting it into the monadic space
I'm navigating some computations there
and then I'm getting the classifier back
all right so Um as I going back to the
to the questions here.
So how are the mon which applications of
monic program? Yeah of course very
important since this is the title of my
talk. So um monic programming can be
seen in uh from multiple perspectives.
What first what applications mean right?
But I I mean something here a little bit
more conceptual and more theoretical.
And so uh from my perspective uh say as
a software engineer software architect I
might be very interested into graceful
uh failure handling. If you are making
conversational agents for example most
of the time your system you know you
know whatever you're doing dealing with
user input you're failing. So you need
to be uh gracefully failing. Uh another
application is rapid specification of
computational workflows. This is more
for data scientists or data engineers
and uh very interesting uh which is much
more on the probably for the software
architects but also for people who are
theoretically inclined this is the
algebraic structure of the written code
and now I'm talking about the the actual
syntax here the actual combination of
symbols not necessarily the objects
which are which the underlying objects
and computations they might be algebraic
might be not but I'm saying that this
here this pipeline uh it's actually has
algebraic structure and because of this
it can be leveraged in variety of ways.
All right. So um how software monets
defined uh let's see there are several
uh several kind of definitions that can
be done. Let me bring one here. So uh
I'm not going to make a live example of
this but the Unix pipeline right. So
it's again this is the cold war kind of
thing what I was saying. Yeah, you can
you can you can use the Unix pipeline to
in this way, right? And whatever
computations you have, they're staged so
to speak. They're like they like they
they go through a certain pipeline and
then you kind of modify what the output
of the of the previous command. So I'm
going to get some some files which are
finished with the letters NB. I'm going
to filter them in order to to get the
names which are with monot and then I'm
going to do I'm going to see the dates
of those. Now there's a calculator
called desktop calculator again one of
the oldest Unix programs and basically
it's using um reverse polish notation
and you know like I'm not going to
expand on this but basically yeah this
is like very much like a monaric
pipeline and if you look at uh a package
uh or system a constellation of packages
called tidiverse in a in the ecosystem
they do they do apply uh this uh uh
pipelines Well, it's not exactly a
monot, you know, but this is like a
monotic pipeline. And you can see this
is actually fairly easy to understand.
We take the Titanic data, we rename some
of the some of the columns, we filter
them, then group by, you know, but what
we have renamed class and sex and then
we and then we show the counts of the of
the corresponding um corresponding rows
in each group.
So this is more like informal uh
formally and I'm not going to go through
the formal definition but we can uh
define a unit uh unit operation or
function and a bind operation in some
sense probably this is this is uh I mean
if you're experienced mathematical user
this should be telling you a lot. So
basically you start with certain type of
um object which has um which has a head
uh m and then you your binding operation
it knows how to bind this kind of
objects with whatever functions are
given. If you want a easy implementation
this is it right so you just fold with
bind and right um mathematica has always
had monots by the way right since
version 0.01 01. So um you can uh this
can be verified using the monet laws
again this is like the the algebraic
structure of the code which I was
talking about and um and this can be can
be seen can be verified. So you can see
here with the postfix um application of
um postfix operation sorry postfix
function this is the infix version of
the postfix application of functions
right we have like this kind of monaric
pipeline but the monaric pipeline I'm
talking about for mathematica from 0.01
01 is this right? I mean this is the
proof here. So if you use if your inputs
are lists and the outputs are lists you
can actually prove that you have a a
monot. All right so going back to the to
the questions. So how to explain monari
pipelines in an easy to understand
manner. So um let me see somewhere here.
Yeah, monot monots. Um, I thought I had
some some dedicated uh slide for this.
Let me actually go here. Uh, yeah, this
is it. Uh, so
all right. Uh, so here, right? I mean,
in case you haven't haven't understood
what I'm saying, it's really just some
kind of pipeline, right? There's a
pipeline and you're working on the thing
which this pipeline brings, right? So we
basically have the pipeline and you're
doing whatever kind of manipulations
this is this corresponds here to the
classifier right to the classifier
workflow I was showing here right so
basically there's like a certain
pipeline value maybe this is the it's
actually a context right it's a context
with variety of things in it but then we
manipulate that context right we we
apply different operations on it and
then at some point we get to the result
not sure is this better just more
artistic not necessarily better all All
right. So, um what is the
um how the monaric programming can be
invented? That's actually a very
interesting question. So, let me see uh
where's my uh invention of uh
of the of the monot. So, um I think it
was here. No. All right. Yeah. Uh as I
as I want, I'm going to be scrolling.
And yes, this is what this is what this
slide is. This is the invention slide.
Okay, so um again no let let's let's
start with the uh Titanic data and um
so imagine I have this natural language
specification use Titanic filter by
passenger age greater than 10 group by
passenger class and passenger sex counts
right show counts. Now uh if I this is
these are different codes which is you
can see actually there's some some
function here some pucklet which
actually makes this translation from
natural language to code but um you can
see for example in python and wra
language how we have this assignments
here right so after the first line you
see object it's on the left hand side
but also it's on the right hand side and
we might ask especially here right and
especially I don't know like you can see
it also here maybe that's not needed.
Maybe you can stage uh your
computations, you can define your
functions in such a way that you don't
need to have this assignment, right? And
so and this is more or less what is
happening here with this app code,
right? So this again from tverse uh it's
a package dlyier right and yeah I mean
so we take Titanic we filter it we group
it show the counts uh so uh this is
actually uh this this kind of reduction
of uh of the syntax sugar can be enough
of a motivation but it also has some
kind of further uh further implications
and so uh I'm yeah this here is just uh
just showing the different computational
examples all All right. So, let me go to
the questions which um again I'm
scrolling here. Um how to explain monot
in the easily understand we moved
through that is knowing monary
programming required um no I mentioned
this I'm going to mention this again
right so uh you can live happily without
u without knowing about monots right
now monots they if depending what what
you're trying to I mean what is your
goal for knowing or utilizing them I use
them mostly as a user interface and uh
from that perspective they serve very
well but um in some languages like if
programming hasll even if you don't know
what monot exactly is monot being used
to actually you know develop the
language you know conceptually and so uh
since um and I answered this question is
monic programming supported inflamm
language let me uh look at the questions
here
I see in the qu Q&A uh section very
basic question can you explain the yes
can you explain the double right arrow
symbol that you often use in your
presentations I'm not familiar with it
and wra syntax so um yeah uh basically
and this is related to how monets are
programmed right so I was saying that
monot are programmed in a very easy
manner you just fold in this way and to
some extent this is what is happening so
if If I if I kind of go here, let me
see.
I'm simply I'm simply overloading. It's
like an algebraic operation. This is
like uh one of the operators which you
can overload. And uh so basically I'm
saying if you see if you see this uh uh
if you see this double right arrow, this
is going to be expanded into some
application of fold. Right. So whatever
we're showing here with fold. Yeah. It's
just it's just that. So it is a I mean
it's a little bit more than that but if
you are really curious how this is done
there's a package called uh monot
makers. This monet makers is used into
you can see I have a bunch of monot
monaric packages you know in
the packet repository.
uh basically every conference wrote
technology conference I submit one or
two packets before the conference and
this is the case for this package event
records transformation which is helps
managing time series and this is DSL
examples which actually can be used to
use LMS to translate to translate
commands and you can see if you
translate I mean if you translate this
with us like if you use this pipeline
segment right it's uh you see I mean I I
use the LLMs to translate command by
command whatever the specification is
and then I just concatenate them with
this uh double right arrow. Now the
double right arrow when you kind of have
this whole expression here let me zoom
if when you have this whole expression
you is just converted to fault right and
so and this is many of my pockets
internally very often uh because the the
six syntax highlighting they don't
understand necessary the application of
the double right arrow I actually use
the fault you know I implemented with
fault because it's kind of more clear
and supported by the corresponding um
corresponding highlighting uh software
modules. All right. Uh so they hopefully
answered this. Let's actually go back to
the questions and see um right what else
uh is monaric programming um support in
warm language. I already explained this
but again I would like to mention this
at some point I mean like few years ago
10 you know people like hey you know
when Mathematica is going to support
mons well always has supported mons. So
I mean obviously Mathematica is a big
language and you know not necessarily
everybody knows all properties in it but
this is actually fundamental in some
sense right and it is somewhat
fundamental to lisp like programming
languages. So uh okay the what are the
limitations of programming using
software monets? Uh this is an
interesting question from from a
conceptual perspective.
So um it is a I mean do people think uh
in a linear manner right? I mean
somebody might tell me no we don't we
don't necessarily use um use think in
monatic pipelines. Uh well I don't know
I mean in my my experience most people
especially nowadays right they don't
necessarily want to program right they
program but it's inflicted on them.
they're basically doing I don't know
like say data science engineering
whatever right and then they kind of
rely on recipes and they rely on this
kind of simple staged staged type of
workflows and another thing here one of
the easiest things to automate with
machine learning is machine learning
workflows and you can see it here right
so you can see that how this uh how this
machine learning workflow uh here it's
pretty well pipelined now There are
certain there are certain situations in
which I mean if you are using uh if
you're using wolf from language to
express some kind of ideas which were
not even clarified you know in your head
and you're using programming in order to
understand and clarify better uh what is
going on right I mean yeah well there's
no pipelining per se although you can
use uh you can use like the monots as an
interface the interface perspective as a
brainstorming technique okay uh So yeah
and this is what I was saying um if you
if you want to if you want to use the
monots as a software interface actually
it's not say in vol language this
actually means that you have to do quite
a lot of work let me actually show you
this um so I'm going to go to this
package packlet and the pucklet has a
github um GitHub link and I'm going to
go to through the code the of the
packlet
and so yeah so you can see it's actually
this is not necessarily that elegant or
that concise right I mean in some sense
I'm doing quite a lot of definitions in
order to have this kind of nice pipeline
behavior handle handle errors gracefully
and so forth right so and uh you can see
also like um if I go to the beginning of
this package uh somewhere way here the
actual monot uh the core of the monot is
being generated using this monot makers
which I was okay so just a moment here
all right yeah so I have so this
generate state monot code right this
comes from this pocket monot makers
which I was mentioning earlier and I'm
saying well this is how my monot is
supposed to be what is the the the
prefix symbol and some of the elements
of it what are the context of that monot
and then you know then I'm back
basically
um implementing different operations
right in the monadic space and so and
these are these are functions which can
be pipeline so it's very similar to say
the the add star operator right like say
if I do okay maybe not here but if I do
something like I don't know like say uh
uh identity maybe like this and then
sign and then x right so I mean It's
somewhat somewhat like that in a sense
like I'm you see this is this is an
operation between two functions. So I
know part of it is is that now is that
easy to do in mathemately
from language you can do this relatively
easily but you need to spend you need to
spend the time testing testing the the
software monots and kind of seeing do
they do they actually produce the
experience do they actually uh handle
gracefully what you're doing. One
interesting way to do it actually is to
generate random pipelines and you this
another thing which you can do easily
with this monic perspective. I mean
imagine that I basically I know that in
a a pipeline I might say it has like say
five or six elements or between between
three and six I can generate the the
segments randomly. I can put them
together and basically I either should
get the failure symbol the failure
symbol of the monot or I should get some
result for example right and this is how
how this packlets how they have been
tested right I have like some uh some
special special kind of packages about
this and I I probably kind of spent too
time too much time on this but okay let
me since I started uh answering u or
answering that question in that way let
me see where it is here So I'm going to
go to my GitHub repository. Initially
before uh the pucklet repository was uh
established created I had I had this in
a se separate uh separate um uh part
here and one of the things uh here well
uh maybe it's in unit tests right yeah
so let monarics uh monic
unit tests somewhere here you might see
uh these are actually
This is not the random random uh random
generation but I guess you have to
believe me. I thought I can find this
very easily. Anyway, somewhere somewhere
here I do have like say um okay yeah I
do have it right random pipelines right.
So I'm generating a bunch of like say
300 400 random pipelines and I'm
actually testing do I get do I get
results which are which I expect. This
has been actually a way to a very good
way to stress test the the system. And
yeah, you can see here these are the
different stages at which I'm selecting
the segments and then I'm kind of um you
know making the random pipelines and
then I run them. All right. So um I'm
not I'm not going to let me kind of
return to here. I have only a few
questions more to answer and um
uh yes. So why do I use Monari
programming? This actually a big um a
big question and I'm going to uh I'm
going to just scroll down and find find
the visual aid this one here. So let me
see should I slightly at least maybe
zoom out. Um okay so there's a certain
problem domain right I I or whoever we
um we develop a software monot for it
monet software monot for it this package
or packlet or whatever and then we uh in
parallel we develop certain domain
specific language of commands which
actually clarifies you know what exactly
we're trying to do and um I mean in a
sense like you should be able to to kind
of do you should be able to kind of
formulate the the operation in order to
you know if you understand at all what
this problem domain you know you're
trying to um to get to internalize or
you're trying to understand or you know
make tools for and so and this is an
iter iterative process right so you make
this monots you make this DSL and etc
right at some point um yeah unit testing
unit testing for the parsers for the
grammarss at some point you marry the
two and you can make a conversational
agent for that and so this here like
this here Maybe this is live. Let me
actually do a live life live evaluation
here. So basically what is happening
right now this ars right it's a bunch of
um it's basically yeah for each of these
commands here I have generated the
pipelines right and this this um this um
uh table you see here it has this kind
of pipelines. Another thing to kind of
do um is um let me actually this is
related but you see for example this
pipeline here which is with um with the
uh again classification I can actually
do it say with LLMs in this way and this
related to what I was saying I have some
grammar grammar or I have some um
commands which I have developed and I I
can evaluate this I mean in like what
I'm doing right now I think I'm eval
Yeah. Yeah. So each of these commands
right now is being translated by an LLM
and I claim or I hope that this is
actually going to produce an executable
code that's actually not at random at
all in a sense. I mean I know to be
guaranteed if I evaluate this in place
you see I called an LLM the LM
translated this in place into into into
that command right or if I do show
classify measurements. This actually is
going to be bit yeah it's supposed to be
somewhat more complicated. This is
related to this uh algebraic properties
of the monotic code, right? I can plug
and play different elements of this
pipeline, right? And make more
complicated pipelines. So um so
basically I would say uh I mean this is
one of the the ways to answer it. Uh I
had some other other kind of example
here. Now why I'm using I'm still
answering why I'm using monot. So you
can see this here this uh okay for some
reason I cannot I cannot copy this. So
uh let me show you this here right now.
This here is a is a monaric pipeline
which doesn't avoid the monots right for
doing quantile regression and I can
request uh an code generation with
avoiding the monots very often people
tell me well I don't want to use your
packets I give me just you know
mathematical code with whatever kind of
tools I have which do code generation.
Yeah, this is the mathematical code for
it. And you can see it's actually quite
messy. It's actually it's doing exactly
the same thing. I mean, if I if I
evaluate this code, it's going to
produce, you know, it's going to produce
the more or less the same results as as
this one, right? But you know, like
which one is more convenient or easier
to see? I mean, you can see it here is
taking the data, giving the summary,
doing the regression, doing the plot.
Yes, you can find the corresponding
elements here. It's just messy. All
right. So, I think I have one or two
questions more. I wanted to answer let
me kind of see here
maybe I I think I answered the most
important ones well yeah I mean yeah
I've been developing software mods um
involved from language more or less
since uh year 2017 I was teaching a
class for digital humanities in Oxford
and at the time this is before the LLM
revolution right so at the time it was
it was kind of obvious and the this
digital student digital humanities
students or graduate students they could
understand the workflows but because of
the too much code you need to kind of go
through and understand it need to be
basically a a fairly developed
programmer it was very hard for them to
do anything related to data science now
this is not not necessarily the case all
right I mean you can yes we can uh we
can do um I mean with LLMs with this
kind of systems like what I'm showing
this can be very easily done all right
so I think I mentioned everything here I
wanted to do quite a lot of references
in this uh notebook there where also
every section it has its own its own
kind of uh its own references and you
can see some topics I didn't talk about
but yes this doesn't need to be about
machine learning it can be about
epidemological
systems and another thing is that yeah
it can be nonlinear we can have some
very nonlinear non-pipelinable type of
monots and this is one of the examples
of this is using functional parsers all
right so let me see any questions Here
I don't see any kind of questions. So
let let me let me then u for the rest
one minute explain.
So you can see this algebraic uh these
are algebraic operations circle plus
circle multiply and circle dot right and
I'm using those to
I'm using those to uh to kind of make
some kind of complicated parsers. But
these parsers each of these are
functions. So basically this here it's a
very complicated algebraic expression
between functions. So this this is
another way to kind of show why monets
are being used. See another question
here is the presentation notebook
available. Oh yeah yeah I'll I'll upload
it immediately after this. All right. So
I don't I don't see any other questions.
So
feel free to contact me after the
presentation.
Guess that's it. like, well, thank you
for attention.
