Hi everyone and welcome. Today I'm very pleased to be joined by Theodore Postol uh a professor emeritus of science technology and international security at MIT. Uh also renowned for being a leading scholar in nuclear weapons, ballistic missiles, missile defense and yeah other weapons systems that can destroy humanity. and for this reason behind Academia also advising the Pentagon. So, uh, welcome back to the program. It's great to have you on again. Well, uh, very nice to be back. It's, uh, it's unfortunately I I I guess I could say it's very nice to be back, but it's unfortunate that I'm back because, uh, I I have vowed to, uh, minimize my time on the internet except when I have something unique, uh, to, uh, to offer, unique to my skills. And uh unfortunately it looks like we have another subject unique to my skills to deal with. Yes. And uh yeah this is what we have been yeah speaking of which is uh the Trump's proposed um golden dome with uh space-based components which is a yeah missile defense program. Um but again as uh scholars um of international security know whenever you look at whenever they use the word defense uh it does mean it's not disruptive. Uh and of course you can always uh have a discussion uh to what extent something is really defensive as um yeah most defensive weapons can also be used offensively. U and again you've been kind enough to be willing to share some of your thoughts on this golden dome also have some slidesh but if we just start with the overarching issue what is the golden dome for the people who are not following well the details the the golden dome is in in my view it's a it's a political um construct that it it it it has no merit uh technically. We we'll talk about that uh shortly. But but what it does do is it um it allows Trump to play to his base. That is to say, he's you know, he's defending America, United States from all these u threats from nuclear threats from all over the world, both small and large. I mean some of these threats are large now like China and and of course Russia. Um some of these threats are much smaller like North Korea uh which incidentally is is unlikely to be uh effectively negated with any of the defense systems that the United States currently has or can predictably have in the future. So, so it's a small threat in terms of numbers of missiles and but it's uh it's it's not um it's not something that's meaningless in terms of its uh threat to the to the United States. But, uh you know, the fact of the matter is that um the technology is um is not really there for these kinds of missile defenses. There are two kinds of defenses that uh Trump is now talking about. First, he's talking about beefing up the current missile defense systems that the United States has. These would be the the Navy Eegisbased standard missile 3 uh interceptors that are at sea now. It's hard to know. It's the the Pentagon's been very um um uh obfiscating with regard to the number of uh standard uh missile 3es, SM3s. Um there are two basically uh two kinds of SM3s. There's the block 1A and block 2A. Uh the the 1A has a burnout speed of about 3 kilometers per second uh which is uh really not not not usable for even shorter range missiles. It's really a very minimalist system. The block 2A has a burnout speed that's higher about 4 and a half kilometers/s which is enough to look somewhat like a capability but really isn't a capability. Uh but uh and then there's the groundbased uh missile defense system which has about some 40 odd 44 is the current number interceptors which look like u ICBMs in fact um but I can hear just take a quick well it seems that u yeah because nuclear weapons are a key deterrent It's defined often as a defensive weapon. You know, the initial ABM treaty, the anti-bballistic missile treaty, had the logic that it it was dangerous because it could convert nuclear weapons from a defensive into an offensive weapon with the logic that, you know, the United States could never intercept the vast amount of Soviet missiles, but um which would survive a first strike and thus be used in a tal strike on the United States, but with a powerful full uh missile defense. The idea was it could enable a first strike. That is just a surprising. Yes, that's in principle, but it it also um the um the ABM treaty of uh of uh 1972 uh in its prologue um uh basically points out that in very simple language I might say it's a it's an it's an interesting treaty to actually read the original language to. In the preamble to the treaty, it basically says um you know if you have missile defenses uh they are going to it's going to be nearly impossible because of potential capabilities of these missile defenses will not be easily ignored by uh by leadership of the different countries. So, as long as you have these missile defenses, you're going to have a a powerful incentive to expand your offensive nuclear forces to overcome them. That's the obvious and simple way to overcome uh a defensive system is just build more uh a defensive system, build more offensive systems. And so the preamble to the ABM treaty actually points out that the ABM treaty is a critical treaty in order to have arms limitations. So the strategic arms limitations uh treaty was of course being negotiated was negotiated around that time the first uh treaties. So um so that's uh the problem. The problem is that you get kind of the worst of both worlds with um these missile defenses because a reasonable question for people to ask given at least my arguments which is that they don't work uh is so why are you concerned about it? If you're not you know what's to be concerned about if they don't work? Well, the problem is that neither um no adversary can be sure that the capabilities of an existing defense uh isn't greater than uh they thought or couldn't change with some technical innovation uh and change in a in a time that is short relative to your ability to modify your your offensive forces. So that's the u that's the underlying concern that political leaders and of course there's the appearance of having capability which results in political le or could result in political leverage that uh political leaders are also concerned about because if if you have an adversary with political leverage that's a big concern in in an eyeballto eyeball confrontation. So, so another reason you uh would uh not want the appearance of any capability as a of a missile defense even if it's not very good uh to be um um uh you know to be a factor in any uh political confrontation. And then of course you have the problem that concerns Putin most and I think Putin is very concerned about this. If you if you look at his um his um statements very carefully, it is extremely clear that he is very well informed about the limitations of American missile defenses. So he is not afraid that American missile defenses have any capability. But he is afraid of American missile defenses because he is worried that American leaders are so ill informed that at some time he might face an American president who actually thinks that these American missile defenses have some capability. And if the person is so ill informed that they think it has these systems have some capability, they may do something in a crisis that could force the Russians to respond because you know, for example, if the United States attacked uh Russia with some misunderstanding that they could actually deal with a Russian counterattack. Uh the escalation the outcome would in terms of global escalation to destruction of civilization uh would be put would occur you know independent just because of the the uh complete uh lack of understanding uh by uh the American political decision maker and that is clearly that is absolutely clearly one of Putin's great concerns. concerns and frankly um I I tend to share uh his concern because I've dealt enough with um American uh political leadership and incidentally uh American military leadership to know how um totally ignorant and ill-informed some high level uh decision makers both military and and and civilian can be. and um that uh uh really uh ill-informed uh uh characteristic that thread through American uh uh political decisionm is is a concern because people could do something really dangerous, incredibly illinformed that could start things going in a way that nobody will be able to stop. So um so I think there are a lot of levels of consideration uh as as to why these missile defenses can be problematic and u and of course the underlying factor that is is unique which makes them also different from conventional defenses which can often be a very good thing from a military point of view is um is the fact that they are that that the result would be a nuclear war. Not a not not a conventional military failure if your defense didn't work very well and the enemy was able to bomb with conventional forces against you. But the escalation to a war that would end civilization and possibly um uh reduce the human population to near zero on the planet. uh that um that's a different scale of existential threat relative to just somebody uh being able to suppress your conventional air defenses and and bomb you um effectively with uh conventional explosives. So, so the nuclear uh strategic missile defense problem is is really quite unique and um but uh here before you can can you see my cursor? Probably not. Uh yes. Yes, can see. You can see. Oh, that's good. All right. So, uh, the the the the surfacebased interceptors that, uh, the United States, um, is, uh, uh, contemplating enriching, enhancing, uh, are, um, the, um, uh, the, uh, groundbased missile defense interceptors. They're sometimes called GBIS. And these are are really basically small ICBMs. They um they launch a uh an interceptor that you know weighs maybe one or 200 lb and the interceptor homes on a target. I won't go into detail now but I will talk a little bit about it later if if uh our conversation moves in that direction. And um and this intercept is around 50,000 pounds and there about 44 of them right now. So, it's not clear to me exactly what um uh Trump is uh proposing, but he's probably proposing an expansion of the number of these interceptors, but the number is really quite small relative to the forces of China and Russia, just 44 of them. Incidentally, their intercept rate is very likely to be near zero for reasons I can talk about later. And then there's this second class of interceptors, the SM3 standard missile 3 block, the block 2A. And um there's a block 1A, but this never achieves a speed high enough that it's even even theoretically uh much of a a threat. the the 2A uh achieves a speed of about 4 and a half kilometers per second. Uh and it's it's a very marginal threat. Again, I'll explain why in terms of missile defense capability, but it's on ships and these ships can move anywhere in the world. So they have the potential uh to be moved to locations where um they um they could be uh used in in in in a variety of applications. So, for example, um if we um uh if we look at um if if you put this standard missile 3 on ships and you move them close to the United States, the 4 12 kilometer interceptor could be used against a strategic attack from either Russia or China, you could have it. And of course the longer the larger faster interceptor could in principle cover the entire United States. Now the uh the problem rather than uh beat around the bush, let me just explain why u uh these uh surfacebased missiles uh really um uh have no capability to be uh of concern at least to any adversary. The real problem is is decoys. If you um if you look at um decoys that could be built, the the interceptors all work in the near vacuum of space and it's very easy to build a balloon that will travel along with a warhead. here. In fact, if I show you here, here's a particular balloon that's in the shape of a warhead, but it doesn't have to be in the shape of a warhead because you have no spatial resolution when you're looking with an infrared camera from the interceptor. This is actually an actual warhead, which is mimicked by this balloon, but again, you don't really need to do a full uh balloon of this kind. Here's a rigid decoy, but um but simple balloons of this type would also uh work fine against the defense. So, so if you were looking, if you were at a homing interceptor, you would see a a bright object and you're traveling at uh close to the object's coming at you at at at um uh seven uh or 8 kilometers per 7 kilometers per second. You're coming at the object at seven or eight kilometers per second. So your closing speeds like 15 kilometers per second. So in in in in 5 seconds um you're uh you're you know basically 100 kilometers nearly 100 kilometers apart. So in 5 seconds you have to see this object, study it carefully enough because you don't have full resolution and maneuver your interceptor so you're going to hit it um in you know in in in the 5 seconds you have to maneuver and that's a very hard thing to do. But this is um what the missile defense designers wish they would see. In fact, what we're sure absolute certainty they would see is this. They would see, you know, objects all of which look appear different from each other, including the warhead could be made to look different. And there's just no way there's no technical way, no science. So I'm not talking about technology, no science that would allow you to pick out the warhead relative to decoys. So these systems are useless. You would you would never have started building them if um uh if you understood, which incidentally we did understand, that the decoys could not be separated from the warheads. My university MIT was involved in a scientific fraud where they claimed in 1997 and 98 so it's more than 25 years ago that they had test data that could actually help you know indicated that they had a chance of telling warheads from decoys my university MIT. So and um I became persona nonrada with the MIT administration. And I say the MIT administration this what three three presidents of MIT who were involved with this fraud uh against the American people uh making false statements about the capabilities of these missile defenses. And the result of this is uh hundreds of billions of dollars have been defend built on the have been spent on these defense systems which have no chance of working at all. Just no chance at all. Anybody who can build a ballistic missile and put a nuclear warhead on top of it is more than able to put a uh uh to inflate a balloon and toss it out along with the warhead. Uh that the balloon weighing u you know a few hundreds or tens of grams weight hundreds of balloons or dozens of balloons and defeat this missile defense. There's no sophistication involved at all in this. This is a fraud on a on a gigantic scale. So anyway, but all right. So so so what what Trump is talking about is expanding the number of interceptors. Um he's going to cla he claims he's going to make some improvements in the technology. It's a meaning those improvements would be meaningless because you can't tell the decoys from the warheads. That's that's fundamental. So, um the the really uh unique part of of of this system is the spacebased part of the system. This is unique and different from anything else that has been put on the table as a major program that the United States will move forward on. People have talked about space-based interceptors, but the country has never committed itself to building such a system, but Trump appears to be saying that he's going to go ahead with a space-based system. Now the um the way the space-based uh system works is you put satellites in orbit. So let me just show you a typical example. This is a situation where uh again you can see the cursor. So hopefully so you you would put satellites in uh in in an in orbits that are relatively low. uh you can't put them so low that atmospheric drag will be a won't be a problem. For example, you could put I've depicted here a 400 kmter altitude satellite. Um it could be 300 km which would put it closer to the ground where it could it could engage an ICBM rising from the surface of the earth. But um the problem is that air drag would require the satellites to be boosted. So they would only have relatively, you know, they'd have uh lives of maybe a few years in orbit. So you'd have to boost them up. It's very expensive to launch them. You'd have to be maintaining them in orbit. So I just chose a 400 kilometer altitude which um is uh not the best choice because air drag can be a problem there as well. But but a good uh compromise and uh I I decided that incidentally all these numbers are very close to numbers other organizations and analyses have come up with. So it's nothing here is out of line. And I chose just for illust points of for illustration purposes an interceptor that would be 5 kilometers/s in a 400 kilometer uh satellite orbit. So you have space interceptors housed in uh what you might call a space satellite. You know, the satellite would have a housing, a garage for the interceptor. The interceptor just can't sit in space. There's radiation. Uh there's um uh it needs power. Uh it needs um temperature control. Uh it needs communication systems. You know, it's going to be in space for years. So um and so so so that's an important um uh set of considerations. A reasonable guess for the weight of one of these satellites including its interceptor might be about two tons. Could be 1,500 kg. It's unlikely to be two tons. It's probably going to be bigger than that. But let's you know two it doesn't really matter right now. It's fiction. It's uh it's what I call view graph systems which the Pentagon is very good at proposing viewraphph systems that are never built or you know or never or or turn out to run at technical problems that are overwhelming. There are technical problems here. I'll assume for the sake of just general discussion that the technical problems can be solved. that should not be taken as a given, but I'll just assume that for purposes of describing a potential system to your audience. So, um, uh, at at this location, this red location here, I assume that a distant space-based satellite sensor system observes the launch near the surface of an ICBM, quite a distance, thousands of kilometers down range from the satellite orbit. And I I assume maybe 20 seconds uh is spent while the um satellite uh distant satellite tracks the initial flight of the ICBM. So we know what direction it's going because we're going to launch an interceptor. We have to know where to try to uh choose an intercept point. And uh and then uh we assume at this point here uh after maybe 20 or 30 seconds we launch an interceptor at maybe um 70 or 80 seconds. The satellite has moved maybe you know roughly easily a thousand kilometers down range or more. Uh the interceptor has um gone through an acceleration phase and is coasting and then um maybe 160 or 170 seconds from the initial uh detection of a launch, the interceptor would be in a position to hit the ICBM before it finishes powered flight. So that's the idea. And um uh if you wanted to uh see what one of these constellations look like uh this is anam this is a constellation. I just put this together with some uh analys some some analysis I did from an earlier time. And uh these blue uh circles here uh show you the the range of the interceptor the after after it finishes its powered flight. So this is the maximum range at which um the intercept can occur. So for example, if there's a launch of an ICBM at this location uh shown here again you can see the cursor just uh is that right Glenn you can see the cursor or Oh yeah yeah yeah it's on the right model here. Yeah yeah so so uh here is an intercept point. So this is a roughly the region from which the ICBM would be launched. This uh circle, this white circle here shows you the the area, the location of the satellite when the launch began. And this shows you the rough distance the satellite went before the actual intercept occurs. Now the um uh in this view here um I I can let's see if I can do this. Um, I'm going to stop share and let me go back to share. Can you see this uh video? Uh, yes, it's up now. Okay. All right. So, let me turn it on. This is a video just showing you the motion of these satellites. Now, keep it keep in mind that these satellites are moving. So some of the time you can see there's much more space between the satellites than at other times. So if you're going to size if you if you're going to produce a constellation size with a large enough number of satellites that they will for example there will always be one satellite in a location where it will be possible to engage a single ICBM launched from the surface of the earth. Then you're going to need a certain number of satellites in orbit. And that number is probably close to 2,000 satellites. In this particular depiction, I have 288 satellites. So, so um so um so the um the um just turn on. So the situation uh is that you would need a couple of thousand of these satellites uh in orbit to be able to engage one ICBM launch uh from the surface of the earth. Um if um if you were uh from anywhere on the surface of the earth within the uh orbital characteristics that you chose. In this case, this is a 45 degree inclination orbits. You could make the orbits uh uh slightly higher or slightly lower in inclination, but you you basically get a number between 1,500 and 2,000 satellites needed. So, for example, just to give you a sense of what you actually might have to contend with, if you wanted to be able to engage one ICBM from any launch from anywhere on on the surface of the Earth, and you had um needed 2,000 satellites, you you would therefore thereby need to launch about 4,200 tons into orbit, which would uh cost you about $4.2 billion. But the counter to this system is well, what if I'm dealing with North Korea? North Korea, it's reasonable to expect North Korea could launch 10 ICBMs at some future time once they have them ready to go. So you would have to have um you know instead of 2,000 uh satellites in orbit, you'd need 20,000 satellites all in orbit. That would cost you $42 billion to launch them. And if you needed to deal with an ICBM field, which could be well could launch well more than a 100 ICBMs within the parameters of a single satellite, you might have to put 200,000 satellites into orbit, which would cost you $420 billion to launch. Now, this is a very misleading numbers that I'm giving you because the $4.2 billion for launching is if I simply launch dirt into or you know the weight into orbit. I haven't built the satellites. I haven't paid the price to build those satellites. So, let's say it cost me $20 billion to build the satellites and launch them. That's pretty generous. So 20 billion would become $200 billion, which would then become a couple of trillion dollars. So you would potentially need trillions of dollars to build a meaningful defense because Trump is saying he would like to be able to defend the United States from small and large attacks. It's his it's it's it's his claim. and he claims he's going to commit $175 billion dollars to this. And um I think if he does spend this money uh I think it's easy to predict uh the United States will get absolutely no defensive capability from it. But but I think there will be a great danger created by this system and that's because the system has an extraordinary anti-satellite capability. So in this diagram here I show you uh three satellites postulated in 400 km altitude orbits. So if we look at the green uh the green satellite first, if I the interceptor for for this satellite has a 5 km/s capability because it's designed allegedly designed to be able to shoot down an ICBM coming up from the surface of the earth. But if I want to use this interceptor to instead attack a military early warning satellite in geocynchronous orbit, all I need is 2 kilometers per second to get to that orbit in 6 hours. And in fact, if I use half of the velocity of the two 5 km/s interceptor, I can get there in 3 hours. And if I use the 5 kilometer per second, I can get there in a one and a half to two hours. So I have a very rapid short warning attack capability to satellites at all meaningful levels. What I've shown here are the orbits of the of the global positioning satellite systems and GONAS. So these satellites are are at a 20,000 uh kilometer uh altitude above the earth's surface. They they uh geocynchronous satellites rotate once once every have an orbital period of 24 hours. So they essentially rotate uh around the earth at the same rate at which the earth rotates. So they appear to be stationary above a region of the earth. And so that these satellite orbits are very good for um uh military communications, commercial communications, television, uh you know, phone, all kinds of communications and early warning and surveillance and you know they are absolutely critical to the military nuclear warfighting capabilities of the United States, Russia and China. So these satellites would be immediately at risk. And note that the numbers of these satellites are tens of satellites. So we're talking about tens of thousands of these satellites if you're going to have a missile defense system. So the the moment you begin deploying these satellites into space with interceptors with within within a very short time you're going to have an overwhelming anti-satellite capability that would threaten the uh warfighting capabilities of China and Russia as well as potentially other countries. So this is a great problem that um uh is going to would will create a a threat to international stability that it's hard to know what the responses will be. Satellites can be thought of as essentially stationary objects. An orbit is perfectly known. The location of an orbit is perfectly known. So um uh the satellites spend a large part of their time in sunlight. So the interceptor doesn't even need to be an infrared homing interceptor. In other words, it could it could be optical homing. And optical homing interceptors are very easy to build because optical um uh f uh focal plane arrays that work in the optic in the visible light range. Every every camera you buy is capable of doing that. Making these exotic infrared homing uh interceptors uh is is harder to do. And uh so uh the United States does have an advantage at this moment at this time. It won't maintain the advantage but most of these satellites all of the satellites will be in in sunlight a reasonable period of time. So if the counter to this um uh this system is to is to attack uh the the um uh the um uh the American satellites and because they're going to be at 400 kilometer altitudes. So they're going to be relatively low altitude satellites. So what you could do is um you could launch uh the standard missile 3 4 and a half kilometer per second satellites which incidentally is a souped-up air defense missile built by Russia or China. So they wouldn't need to build much to be able to attack these satellites at the 400 km altitude that they operate at. Uh and of course the groundbased missile defense system uh with a much bigger and faster interceptor could go to uh 13 or or 14,000 kilometers. But even though even the fact that those exist today does not pose the kind of threat that uh the uh space-based system will pose because none of these systems are capable of reaching the high altitude systems that are very critical for the war fighting and early warning and surveillance capabilities of of foreign states. So this introduces a new problem independent of defensive capabilities. In other words, this system is going to immediately and convincingly look like a gigantic anti-satellite threat to Russia and China and other countries. And um it's hard to know how this could play out. Um, I just don't know what to predict in in terms of um of of how other countries could react. The the problem is that if you look at the population of satellites in orbits, the low earth orbits are very densely populated. There's a lot of things you want to do in low earth orbits. So these these thousands of space-based interceptors uh would be in these low earth orbits. Now if you attacked these satellites, you would create tremendous amounts of debris from broken up satellites, satellite debris. Now, the satellite debris, there are good sound technical and scientific analyses that show that the amount of debris you could create would be so large because these satellites are low altitude and the density of debris would be high that you would not be able to launch satellites into low Earth orbits for for hundreds of years after the after such a because the debris would be so dense that if you put a satellite into orbit, it would only last weeks or months before it got hit by a piece of debris from the earlier satellite destructions. So you would literally exclude low earth satellite capabilities uh for hundreds of years uh you know uh unless you had some scheme which nobody seems to know how to do at this point to remove all this debris from satellite orbits because there's not enough aerodynamic uh drag to cause these things to uh to drop from orbit. So, so you really have the possibility that you will create uh uh gigantic gaps in altitudes where very very useful satellite operations now occur and would occur for the foreseeable future. For example, now you have things like lowaltitude satellites like Starlink which would not be able to operate. And so the the Starlink is useful because it's low altitude. It's a proliferated satellites because they're not they don't have to be very expens very large numbers of them. They're small. They're inexpensive. And uh terminals to take advantage of Starlink are also much less expensive and will get less expensive, even less expensive as time goes on. So you'll have, you know, satellite uh internet, satellite based communications on a much more global and inexpensive scale as time goes on. But that will not be possible if if uh if you uh destroy these low earth orbiting satellites. So um so the real problem is that um uh you cannot afford you cannot afford a uh a war in space that wouldn't have consequences for hundreds of years. hundreds of years uh for uh for the use of space for all of humankind. So um this is the problem that's now being posed by the um uh by the deployment of this system. Otherwise, it's a good idea. Well, as he began to say, it's uh costly. It might not be very efficient, but it would uh perhaps embolden uninformed political leaders to think they can raise up the escalation ladder cuz the opponent would have to back back down. And of course among uh with the opponent it would fuel a fair which would require larger nuclear um stockpile which um doesn't sound like a recipe for international security and stability though. Uh but what but uh what does this do with existing agreements in terms of not weaponizing space? Well, space would be overwhelmingly weaponized. It would be uh uh I I don't know unless uh countries like Russia and China choose to not react to this threat to their satellites. I I don't know what they'll do. I mean, it's a bad thing for them to react, but on the other hand, it's a terrible thing for the United States. It's a terribly aggressive thing for the United States to do. So um so uh it's unknowable to me at least. I can't predict what the uh Russians and Chinese would choose to do. One thing they could choose to do that would be minimalist is to build uh surfacebased uh interceptors uh which are highly mobile. They could be launched from airplanes for example. it's possible to do this to get at low earth orbit satellites and they would design uh the capability to punch a hole punch a hole in the system so that they could then uh launch um uh you know missiles small smaller numbers of of missiles through the holes they punch in the system that might be a minimal kind of response. they would still be destroying significant numbers of of satellites. They might have to destroy uh several hundred of these satellites. If you had a full constellation, they might have if they wanted to launch, let's say, five or 10 interceptors and be assured that they wouldn't be engageable by a system of a couple of hundred thousand uh uh you know, um space satellites. you might have to launch a few hundred uh anti-satellite interceptors to punch a hole in the system so that you'd have a hole that you could fly through. But that wouldn't be a minor uh provocation from the point of view of the Chinese or the Russians. But that could be that would be I think the minimalist response. the less minimalist responses for them to launch their own um saddle uh you know space-based interceptors and the space-based interceptors would be pointed at the satellite constellation not necessarily uh the low orbit satellite constellation not necessarily ICBMs or or higher altitude satellites but you could give it the capability to go after the higher altitude satellites so that you have a reciprocal threat. Now, that would of course be a very bad thing to do, but uh you know that would be a a pro, you know, a provoked response. So, um none of the responses that I can imagine, assuming there are responses, are very good. I mean they they they will all deeply destabilize the situation creating very short warning times for political decision makers on all sides and that's the last thing we need. We should be doing things to increase the early warning times because it's already the early warning times are already much too short much too short. There was a time when uh this kind of plans to weaponize space would have caused a bit of an uproar and push back from uh well from your former colleagues as well. uh is is there any push back at all for this or because so far the criticism I've seen is that it's going to cost a lot of money but uh you know from the perspective of international security that is the security competition I joke with many of my colleagues who talk who still talk to me that uh the community that calls itself the arms control community in in the United States in particular is brain dead. They're not interested in analysis. You'll see the same stuff coming out. You won't see this in any of the publications in the American arms control community. They're talking about cost and blah blah blah blah. But you know the destabilizing influence of this is this anti-satellite which would happen immediately upon launch of even a very small fraction of an anti-missile system which would be essentially incapable as an anti-missile system would be a gigantic overwhelming destabilizing anti-satellite capability. If you can find me a source that's talking about this I'd be interested. Um, nobody is interested in this in this subject. I used to write for the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, but they reject, you know, they they pushed me off their list of authors, so I I don't write for them anymore. And, you know, I'm I'm out of places to publish. So but it was back in 2007 or9 when China shut down its own weather satellite and um you know the at that point it was a bit uproar you know why you know creating weapons to shoot down satellites this is you know direction the world shouldn't go uh well this seems like a yeah this is nothing like this this is yeah this is very serious this is very serious I mean the Chinese uh anti-satellite uh test was a gigantic uh mistake by the chi I mean a technical mistake they the people you know I've had not direct but indirect contact with uh uh you know very highly informed uh people in China and you know through them I've learned you know there was a anti-satellite test planned but they the the people involved in the planning had not fully appreciated the the risk of debris and uh they could have done a test that would have been uh much less problematic. It was not intend I mean but the but here again this shows you how unintended consequences can occur and uh you know this test uh this Chinese test very substantially increased the debris problem very substantially increased it and um you know uh uh you know a bunch of incidents of this kind could could wind up excluding low earth orbits for everyone. But uh Trump recently or a few weeks ago expressed the desire to pursue a reduction in nuclear weapons but he wanted a trilateral deal with the not just the Russians by getting the Chinese in on this as well as these are the yeah three great powers in the world but but this certainly would sabotage his own initiative wouldn't it? I mean Do the Chinese and Russians have the ability to reduce their nuclear stockpiles if the US is at the same time building this golden dome? You you I mean if if if you're logical I mean uh I mean if you read the preamble to the 1972 ABM treaty you don't have to you know go to 10 years of college to understand the logic there. And um uh the United States has been insisting for a long time that there's no connection. This is after uh the the United States abregated the ABM treaty under George W. Bush. But uh you know, you have these people uh I I think you called them neocons. Uh they're not only irrational in the ways that you describe them, they're irrational in other ways. And uh the logic these people there is no logic to what they're talking about. You cannot have massive missile defenses with any appearance appearance forget alone real capability and expect there to be arms reductions. It's not going to be it's not possible. No one is going to do it. So it's simple. You know it's well no no point to delve into senseless speculation but still you would have some informed idea about the terms of uh the kind of reactions you would get from nuclear power such as well primarily then Russia and China. How how would they respond? Would they well the Russians and Chinese have made uh public statements together uh basically saying this would be extremely destabilizing. They didn't go into any details as to why, but uh you don't have to do my analysis. All you need to do is recognize that the co the connection between defenses and offense is inviable. I mean, you there's a logical connection. So, I don't know what they were referring to in particular. It wouldn't surprise me if they were unaware of the anti-satellite potential that this kind of space-based defense has because certainly in the United States there's so little analysis done. Even when I was in the Pentagon, there was so little analysis done. It was it's just hard to believe. I mean, I was this this single guy working in the basement of the Pent. Everyone used to want say Ted come up to the E-ring, you know, the upper floor of the E-ring where the chief of naval operation, you know, because I was an adviser to chief. I said, "No, no, no. I want to be in the basement because nobody's bothering me down here. I can do analysis. I don't have to spend my time running to every briefing that has no information in it. I can do analysis." And, you know, some of the analysis I did was very important. save the United States from the plain the closely space-based MX. We were three of the five joint chiefs voted against it because of an analysis. I did the the intelligence agencies. This was not something I found that someone in the intelligence agencies brought to my attention and then I brought to the chief. I discovered the the fundamental vulnerability in the system because I was doing some independent analysis. I went to the chief and and explained to him this problem and then he went to the intelligence community and said is this nutcase uh advisor I have does he know what he's talking about and they came back and they said yeah we looked at his analysis is correct and then he went to the joint chiefs and he got three of the five members of the joint chiefs to vote against the deployment first time in the history of the joint chiefs that that had it ever happened. It's never happened before and never happened since. That's the level of an analytical support that was in the Pentagon when I was there and it's less now. I mean, uh, uh, Donald Trump says, maybe he's being accurate, maybe not, you know, who knows? He says that he was unaware of a drone attack uh, trying to kill Putin. That was his claim when he was interviewed that he was not told about this. You say to yourself, what are our intelligence people doing? What is the president being told about? you know, um, when I was talking, uh, you know, I, uh, Bill Perry was a colleague of mine at Stanford and I spent time talking with him and I go in and I talk to him about an analysis I did of the Russian of a Russian um, false alert that occurred in 1996 that was not as serious as many people claim, but was in fact revealed serious problems with the warning system in Russia And Bill Perry was Secretary of Defense when that occurred. And I said to him, I I described this to him and I said, "Did were you briefed on this?" And Bill said to me, he says, "No, I had I had no idea this ever happened until you just now told me." He was I mean to his credit he was forthright about it but what kind of intelligence system doesn't tell the secretary of defense that the Russians had an early false early warning false alert that could have resulted in a massive accidental launch from Russia. He was never never even told about it. Never not even told something wrong about it. He was not even told about it. This is a problem though when you seek to control the information flow to influence decision making you can end up in these situations where the well it's competent it's it's bureaucratic competence it's it's it's politicization it's bureaucratic inflexibility uh the intelligence community in the United States is a is a is a bureaucratic nightmare I have nothing but sympathy for Tulsi Gabbard in her attempts to reform the system. I I doubt she can succeed, but I hope I'm wrong. You know, I think she's quite capable. And so, I'm hoping that she can succeed, but but it's clear to me that she hasn't been able to get enough of a change in the short time she's there. You can't blame her for this because how could Trump not be informed that there was an attempt to kill Putin with with drones. And let me tell you, uh, you know, there were all these people around, uh, some of them my, uh, former colleagues at Stanford like this, uh, uh, this character Mike McFall, who I argue, you know, drives me crazy. And, you know, he's always talking about get rid of Putin. Mr. M Paul ought to think about what could happen instead if he got rid of Putin, who might replace him. And this is this is the mindset of American political decision makers. They talk and talk and talk. They they demonize this uh guy who's, you know, I don't have to like him. I don't think Mr. Putin is is is is Mr. Lovable, but he is, you know, you know, he's a modern-day metick. you know, he's he's he's a brilliant strategist and just spending all your time demonizing rather than trying to understand him and talking about getting rid of him like there would be no negative consequences like he's the source of the problem. He's not the source of the problem. I mean, the the level of of of of naivity that these so-called neoconservatives who think of themselves as realists show in almost every statement they make is shocking. And it's shocking that people accept it. I mean, you you correctly say, why aren't people outraged? Why haven't people been outra outraged for for for a decade or or decades? It's just hard for me to believe. So, you know, but what can you do? Well, that irresponsibility uh kind of takes me to my last question, which is more of a recent event, which is uh this uh yeah attack on Russia's nuclear bombers. I mean, this is uh well, I guess shocking on on many levels. one that one would go to this escalation but second would be the the the lack of clarity around the extent to which uh NATO countries were involved in the planning and I guess even worse would be uh the reactions thereafter I where would this almost mean celebration in the media and then no condemnation from our politicians as if criticizing this will be to take Russia's side I mean there's quite frightening. This is an direct attack now on Russia's nuclear bombers likely with NATO involvement. And there's nothing I would say surely with NATO involvement or surely with American involvement. Now, it may not have been planned, you know, the the Ukrainians may not have been given this intelligence data uh recently, but these strategic systems tend to sit in relatively fixed locations. So um uh you know this information was had to be given to them by the Americans or the Brits who would have had access to the American information and then passed it on. And and if I were Tulsi Gabbard, I'd be asking questions. Where did they get this from? I'd be really pissed. Where did Where did Where did the Ukrainians get this intelligence information? because they had to have it from us Americans somewhere. Not the Brits had it too and NATO had it too because this thing gets shared with these countries who gave them this data and um there should be heads rolling. There should be public statements made about uh you know this was unacceptable, this was unauthorized. None of this is happening. It's like, you know, she just shows you the western political leadership is brain dead. It's just, you know, these people have no idea of how serious this kind of uh conduct is. Direct attack on the strategic forces of Russia, the Soviet Union, you know, this attack that occurred on the early warning radar at Armrave. Unbelievable. This is what got me my status as a as an internet star. That's when I first started talking on the internet because I was so concerned because there's so little real analysis, you know, explanation of what the meaning of these kinds of attacks are. But uh to to attack the strategic bombing forces of Russia, I mean, it's it's beyond belief. And this is the kind of thing that should have been stopped instantly when the when the attack on the arm radar occurred. There should have been information given to the Ukrainians. You do another attack like this. You're on your own. That's what I would have said. You want to have a fight, you know, you're on your own. You you you get no more weapons from us. You get nothing from us. We're not going to have a a global nuclear war because you got something you you have a a fight with the Russians. That's what I would have done. Now, of course, I'll never be, you know, even the arms American arms control community doesn't want me talking, but I mean, it's it's just uh it's horrendous what's going on now. And the political left is just as guilty of this as the political right. You know, it's just incredible. The system is brain dead. It's just not learning anything. Doesn't know anything and it doesn't learn anything. It's a pretty good combination. This is the and combined with the idea that it would be good to get rid of Putin. I mean, the reason why Russia's been very restrained and uh is you know in the steady hand is because Putin has a lot of credibility and you know if you would get rid of him and have a more vulnerable exposed leader, how would they not be able to react to this? this would, you know, could trigger their nuclear retaliatory doctrine. I mean, this this is this is just I I can't believe this is reality that we're attacking the strategic nuclear forces of the Russian Federation. It's uh Yeah, it's No, it's mindboggling though. I I feel much more comfortable knowing that Putin is at the helm of Russia at this time than some of the other players because he has kept his eye on the ball. I don't think he will go I mean he'll strike back. He'll do some things but it won't be it won't it won't be escalatory like what's already been done. I'm I'm pretty sure. Maybe I'm wrong but but he's got to be under enormous pressure. It's it's only because everything he's done has worked so well on behalf of Russia that he will be able to withstand the pressure to do something really escalatory and that would be a great uh mistake and great danger for everyone most of all uh you know just as much Russia as any everybody else. So, and since his concern is Russia and the well-being of Russia and he understands that an escalation would be of no good for everyone, uh I'm hopeful that he will keep a lid on things, but this is hard to believe and the and the western response is just I just don't know what to say. This is the recklessness, the blindness, the stupidity. I mean, I the hallucinatoric character of even thinking about this kind of thing. I mean, it's just I I don't I I just don't have the vocabulary to describe it. I just I just don't unfortunately. Oh, lunacy, I think, is yeah, the right word for it. But uh no, my fear is yeah that the ornik will you know begin to rain down and well it wouldn't be unthinkable in response to an attack on their nuclear. No, it wouldn't be unthinkable. The Russ could well be a response. Nope. You know it's uh I have some additional analysis on those if and when we see more of them. I've did did some additional work on them with explosive warheads and but you do think that they are functional and operational and in plenty of quantity. Yes. Well, I don't know. Uh the reports are they're manufacturing them in some quantity. You don't need a lot of them. I mean, you know, few tens of them could do a lot of damage. Uh I don't think they are the kind of um uh revolutionary weapon that some people have portrayed them to be but they are formidable weapons and I think uh they could be used to great effect again and so professor Postol thank you so much for your time it's uh always interesting And yeah, terrifying to speak with you. So, appreciate it. Yeah, like I said, like I usually say, I hope I ruined your day. You surely did. So, thank you. Thank you. Byebye.